{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2580
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Oblique;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue10;\red13\green13\blue20;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c99942\c98555\c0;\cssrgb\c5490\c6275\c10196;
}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww27720\viewh18680\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Anthea Travas\
Assignment 7/8 write up - RNA seq analysis 
\f1\b0 \
\

\f0\b ******Question 1\
1) Write up your methodological approach in the format of a methods section which could be published in a clinical/scientific paper (note \'96 you do not need to write up this section in the format of any one particular journal).\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
**note that my methods refer to Figures 1 and 2, which are the plots generated by edgeR. These figures would be referred to in a scientific paper, but for the sake of the assignment, I haven\'92t included the figures**\
\

\f0\b Methods
\f1\b0 \

\f2\i \ul \ulc2 RNA-Seq Library Preparation and Sequencing
\f1\i0 \ulnone \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Total RNA was isolated from 3 cell lines, each treated or untreated with 1 \'b5M dexamethasone (DEX) in Himes et al.\super 1\nosupersub . The RNA-Seq cDNA libraries were prepared using Illumina TruSeq RNA Library Prep Kit (v2), where the mRNA was isolated. From this library, 75 bp paired-end reads were \'adsequenced with the Illumina HiSeq 2000 instrument. The RNA-seq data was assessed for quality control using FASTQC (v.0.10.0). To prevent sequencing bias, the first 12 bases of each read were trimmed using the FASTX Toolkit (v.0.0.13) on the 5\'92 end. \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \'a0\

\f2\i \ul RNA-Seq Analysis for Differentially Expressed Genes/ RNA-Seq data processing 
\f1\i0 \ulnone \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 The reference genome was indexed for use with the HISAT2 (v. 2.1.0) aligner. Trimmed reads from the 6 samples were aligned to the reference GRCh38 genome using HISAT2, and data was stored in a .sam file. Samtools was used to sort the SAM files based on the read name and to convert the SAM file from HISAT2 to BAM files. HTSEQ (v. 0.11.1)was then used on each of the 6 .bam files to produce raw counts for the RNAseq data. HTSEQ was used for analysis. The resulting 6 .tsv files were merged into 1 .tsv file. This .tsv file holding all the raw counts of RNAseq data was inputted in RStudio (v.1.4.1717) and analyzed with the edgeR tool (v.3.36.0) to determine differential gene expression (DGE) in the untreated and Dex treated samples. To prevent DGE estimates from RNAseq data from being inflated, a filter was created to keep only genes where at least 25% of samples had raw read counts >25. After normalization of the filtered count matrix, the data was visualized using an MDS plot in edgeR (Fig 1.). To look for DGE, the Exact Test was used to calculate the log2 fold change (logFC), log counts per million (logCPM), p-value and false discovery rate (FDR). Multiple hypothesis testing was done using the Benjamini-Hochberg correction. The mean-difference plot of expression data (plotMD) was created to visualize the significant up- and down-regulated DGEs (Fig 2.). The DGEs were sorted by absolute logFC, and a cut-off of 1.0 was applied, as done in Himes et al.\super 1\nosupersub . \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \

\f0\b \cb3 ******Question 4\cb1 \
Create a multidimensional scaling (MDS) plot of your data. What are the results of this analysis? Write a figure caption for this plot, summarizing the method and conclusions for the data that are shown.
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
We can see from the MDS plot that the untreated and treated samples are clustering together. This means that the gene expression within these two groups (untreated vs. Dex) is not expressed the same way. It is evident that the drug affects the transcriptome of airway smooth muscle cell lines. If the drug had no effect, we would expect the clustering to happen within cell lines instead of within treatment presence/absence. The N080611 cell line does fall further away in the two clusters, but we can see that the N080611 untreated and N080611 treated still stay to the left or right of the plot. \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Figure 1. Multidimensional scaling plot (MDS) of smooth muscle cell lines treated with Dexamethasone and untreated controls. 
\f1\b0 Three primary human airway smooth muscle (ASM) cell lines, N052611, N080611, and N61311, were treated with the glucocorticoid, Dexamethasone (n=3) and had an associated untreated control (n=3). An MDS plot was generated in edgeR using the RNAseq read counts to determine the distance between samples. Visually, the samples form two clusters, where the treated and untreated samples are grouped together. This indicates that Dexamethasone is influencing gene expression in these three cell lines.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \

\f0\b ******Question 5\
What are the top 10 most differentially expressed genes by absolute log2 fold change in your analysis? List the HGNC gene symbols for these genes.
\f1\b0 \
\
      Gene      Gene_Name  \
ENSG00000179593 ALOX15B\
ENSG00000109906 ZBTB16     \
ENSG00000250978 RP11-357D18.1  \
ENSG00000127954 STEAP4\
ENSG00000168309 FAM107A\
ENSG00000267339 LINC00906\
ENSG00000146006 LRRTM2\
ENSG00000152583 SPARCL1\
ENSG00000143127 ITGA10\
ENSG00000163884 KLF15\
\

\f0\b \cb3 ******Question 6\cb1 \
How many genes overlap? How many genes were found only by you and only by Himes et al? What could be accounting these differences?\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
There are 265 genes overlapping between my RNAseq pipeline and analysis and the one done by Himes et al. I found 275 genes that the Himes et al. paper did not report, and the paper found 51 genes that my analysis did not pick up. There are several reasons why the significantly differentially expressed genes differ. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
They used a different reference genome. We used the GRCh38 genome/hg38 reference, and Himes et al. used GRCh37 genome/hg19. Less genes were known in the hg19 build and therefore, my pipeline may have more genes because I used the updated human reference genome.\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
They used the TopHat tool for aligning the reads, but we used HISAT2 for alignment.\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 After the alignment step, they also had different quality control parameters that we did not use in our pipeline. This could have eliminated some of the genes earlier on in the Himes et al. pipeline such that they ended up with lower DGE than my pipeline.\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	4.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
We used HTSEQ for counting, but Himes et al. used a different software tool.\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	5.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
We used edgeR for our pipeline, and they used Cuffdiff and CummeRbund to measure the significance of differentially expressed genes.\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Ultimately, the reason we are getting different DEG is because our RNAseq data analysis pipeline differed. It is well known that different approaches will result in different outputs in terms of differentially expressed genes. However, we can confirm the DGE with qRT-PCR.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \

\f0\b ******************************************\
Part 2\
******************************************\
******Question 2\
List the ENSEMBL gene IDs for the top 5 genes you found while running MISO in comparison mode for replicate 1 (normal_rep1 vs tumor_rep1) and replicate 2 (normal_rep2 vs tumor_rep2) selecting for the most extreme value in the bayes_factor column.\

\f1\b0 \
Rep1\
gene:ENSG00000197077 (present in Rep 1 and 2)\
gene:ENSG00000185721\
gene:ENSG00000239900\
gene:ENSG00000100239\
gene:ENSG00000100142\
\
Rep2\
gene:ENSG00000197077\
gene:ENSG00000015475\
gene:ENSG00000186716\
gene:ENSG00000100083\
gene:ENSG00000128272\
\

\f0\b ******Question 3\
Do your replicates have the same top 5 genes when selecting for most most extreme bayes factor? If not, why do you think they are not the same?
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
When I extracted the top 5 genes with the most extreme bayes factor, I noticed that only one gene was present in both replicates. Upon further investigation, I looked at the top 9 genes within each replicate and saw 4/9 genes shared, but they were in a different order of most extreme bayes factor. There are always going to be differences between replicates. This could result from biological or technical artifacts such as a PCR amplification bias in one gene that was seen in one replicate, but not the other. The technician and experimental reagents could also be the difference that is contributing to these results. \'a0Alternatively, another explanation could be that these cells in each replicate were from the same tumour, but the tumour displayed heterogeneity such that different cells had different expression patterns. \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \

\f0\b \cb3 ******Question 4
\f3\b0 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Describe the findings 
\f3\b0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b Comparing \uc0\u936 :
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\qj\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The normal rep 1 has a lower \uc0\u936  than the normal rep 2 sample. This shows a difference in the distribution of this isoform in normal replicates. When normal Rep 1 and 2 are compared to their tumour counterparts, we see an increase in \u936 , which means that the distribution of this isoform is increased in cancerous cells. \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \'a0\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 Sashimi plots splicing
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\qj\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
For the most part, the splicing pattern seems to remain the same in the tumour and normal samples. \'a0\
\ls3\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
In normal Rep 1 vs. Rep 2 there is a tiny splice junction in Rep 1 with a coverage of 5, that isn\'92t seen in Rep 2. By including this splicing, we get an extra exon (Rep1) but since this splice site isn\'92t in Rep 2, there is a larger intronic sequence. However, this splice junction only has low coverage, so this difference may be accidental. Comparing Rep1 normal to Rep 1 tumour, we can see that this tiny splice junction is missing in the tumour sample. Notably, the tumour has a new splice junction but again, the coverage is low. \'a0\
\ls3\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Comparing the splicing of Rep 2 normal vs. tumour, the isoform with the highest coverage seems to remain the same. However, in the tumour sample, there are a few sites with 3 aberrant splicing patterns. \cf4 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 No\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
otably, these are low coverage (<2), and more investigation needs to be done to confirm whether these are new splice sites.\'a0\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\'a0
\f0\b Sashimi plots coverage
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\qj\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The coverage in Rep 1 normal and Rep 2 normal aren\'92t very different, but the last junction has fewer reads in rep 2. The density of reads spanning junctions is around the same for Rep 1 and Rep 2 in the tumour samples as well. \
\ls4\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
When comparing the tumour samples to the normal samples, I see an increase in read density in the cancerous cells for the first two isoforms. Since there isn\'92t a strong concern for aberrant ENSG00000185721 splicing in this tumour sample, we can expect that there is a mutation in a regulatory portion of the gene that is causing increased expression. \
\ls4\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
In the normal Rep 1 and 2 sashimi plots, we see that the last 2-3 exons have low-moderate coverage, but the tumour sample has decreased coverage in this location. The isoform made of the last two exons is normally expressed at a low level, but this decreases even more in tumour samples. 
\f3 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\

\f1 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Reference:
\f1\b0 \
1. Himes, B. E. et al. RNA-Seq Transcriptome Profiling Identifies CRISPLD2 as a Glucocorticoid Responsive Gene that Modulates Cytokine Function in Airway Smooth Muscle Cells. PLOS ONE 9, e99625 (2014).\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
}